---
layout: page
title: "San Francisco Mini Voter Guide, Nov 2025"
extracss: /css/ballot.css
---

## About

This election has just one line on the ballot, so this is a much shorter guide than usual; see more [about me](/about/), or read a [previous voter guide](/ballots/) for more on my political views and this guide.

In lieu of a full endorsement database, here are some other posts about Prop 50 I've found interesting (I don't agree with all of them):

- [SF Chronicle: Trump’s tyranny can’t continue to go unchecked](https://www.sfchronicle.com/opinion/editorials/article/prop-50-vote-california-21088569.php)
- [Darrell Owens: Your Moral Duty to Vote in California](https://darrellowens.substack.com/p/your-moral-duty-to-vote-in-california)
- [Nate Silver: Democrats can win the redistricting war](https://www.natesilver.net/p/democrats-can-win-the-redistricting)
- [League of Women Voters of California will not take a position of Proposition 50](https://lwvc.org/prop50/)
- [Common Cause: California Meets, Texas Fails to Meet Redistricting Fairness Criteria](https://www.commoncause.org/press/california-meets-texas-fails-to-meet-common-causes-redistricting-fairness-criteria/)

As always, if you think I've missed something important, or have any questions, let me know via the links in the header!

## Prop 50: Yes

I don't like Prop 50. But politics isn't about what we like: it's about what will produce the best outcomes. I'm sad that we've gotten here, but I'm voting yes.

First, the facts. In case you somehow haven't heard, Prop 50 is "gerrymandering for good": we will suspend our independent redistricting commission's maps and add Democratic-majority seats to compensate for the extra seats are expecting to win in Texas from their mid-cycle gerrymandering. It is, fortunately, a narrowly scoped, one-time thing:
- It adds 5 more seats with Democratic majority to compensate for the 5 more seats Republicans hope to win in Texas.
- The maps apply through the next census, after which the redistricting commission would resume control.
- Outside of the changes to add more Democratic seats, there are limited changes (I've seen no suggestion that anyone other than those 5 Republican representatives is being targeted).

I don't like the idea that we have to attack democracy in order to save it; if this were happening generically in response to Republican attacks on democracy, concerning though they are, I don't think I would support it. But this proposition is narrowly scoped as a direct counterbalance to what Texas did. (We _could_ likely have drawn every single district in the state to have a Democratic majority — there are enough Dems in the state to do so — but here we draw only 5 more because that's what Texas did.) There's certainly potential for more states to jump in, but the tit-for-tat approach seems, as in the classic prisoner's dilemma, like the right one.

The proposition also formally calls for Congress to pass legislation and propose a constitutional amendment to "require the use of fair, independent, and nonpartisan redistricting commissions nationwide". Such a request of course does nothing and seems unlikely to come to fruition immediately, but regardless it is the right approach. Prop 50 will still detract from Californians' fair representation in Congress, both Republicans and Democrats[^dems], as will Texas House Bill 4: a federal approach would improve the situation for both states, as well as for the 34 states where the legislature still draws the maps.

So, alas, yes on 50: we shouldn't attack democracy in order to save it, but a direct counterweight to even the scales is necessary and appropriate.

[^dems]: For example, the formerly deep-blue 2nd district along the coast will now have a smaller Democratic majority due to the inclusion of Redding and points north. Will that change who would win a Democratic primary there, resulting in more moderate representation for the district? In any specific case probably not, but in aggregate and over time it's likely. That may still net zero as a matter of Congressional caucus vote-counting, but Congress is not just about party-line votes; the North Coast is solidly Democratic but not in the same way as San Francisco, a fact which gets lost in simple party-line map calculations. If we wanted to just count votes, we should do national-level proportional representation!
